Well, certainly the Middle East has
changed forever. [music] We are looking
at a very different world, not just
because of the war, but because the war
has reinforced certain trends that were
already in play.
Maliha Lodhi, who's been one of
Pakistan's [music]
top diplomats, on power shifts and the
role her country's playing.
It shows the advent and the importance
of middle powers that are now able to
shape geopolitics.
So, Pakistan, by playing this role of
mediation, has [music] established
itself as a middle power which has the
capacity to influence, if not shape,
international politics.
From Bloomberg Weekend, this is the
Mishal Husain show.
After nearly 6 weeks of war, the last
few days have brought about a pivot, or
at least a potential one, as the United
States and Iran agreed to talk. The
diplomacy that made that possible wasn't
led by one of the big powers, or the UN,
or Oman, which has mediated before, but
by Pakistan.
How and why did that happen? What's the
background to the Islamabad summit? And
is there a reshaping of relationships
underway that we should all pay
attention to? As I thought about these
questions, the person I wanted to hear
answering them is the woman who was
Pakistan's ambassador to Washington
twice, and who also served her country
as ambassador to London and at the
United Nations.
It's Maliha Lodhi, and in this
conversation, you'll hear her look
beyond this crisis, beyond the Middle
East and South Asia, to observations
about the United States and where she
differs with her own country's
leadership. Our starting point, how
Pakistan's role as a peace broker came
about.
I think Pakistan's military and civilian
leaders were both working the phones.
Pakistan's army chief in particular was
on the line to Washington
at all times from what I hear,
especially in the last couple of days
just before the agreement was forged.
And of course Pakistan's prime minister
was on the phone
to the Iranian leadership constantly.
And I think the main thing that I
understood was
they never really gave up even when the
situation looked very bleak, especially
when President Trump began to say what
he said and I don't want to repeat some
of the things he said.
But at that time it wasn't clear whether
you know that was just bluster
or that was
you know statements that would so offend
the Iranians that they would just cut
off everything. You mean the words about
ending a civilization,
this kind of rhetoric. And did you in
that period also think how is this going
to bear fruit that this situation is so
extreme? Well yes, I think there was a
point at which it seemed that even the
progress that we were learning from
Pakistani officials that was being made
seemed to be in jeopardy. So I thought
that you know when President Trump began
to sound so frustrated and angry
actually, I thought this is it and the
US will never agree to the terms that
the Iranians conveyed at the end. You
know the famous 10 points they're famous
now because everybody knows about them.
Because you know initially the Americans
rejected them. And said we don't accept
them. But then as we've seen both sides
actually walked back from their
maximalist positions. Iran did and so
did the US. And before we get to those
points, I still want to explore the
relationships that Pakistan has both
with the United States, which you've
seen in your own career over multiple
cycles, and with Iran. So, first of all
on the US, is the key to this the
personal relationship between Field
Marshal Asim Munir and President Trump?
And how on earth was that bond formed?
Well, very much so. I think this
personal relationship between the two
um which really came about very early in
President Trump's second term. And it
really started with the first sort of
early win that in a way Pakistan handed
to him when it arrested and then
extradited the terrorist who was
responsible for the bombing in Kabul uh
during the American evacuation from
Afghanistan. I mean, I think uh
President Trump was so taken in by this
gesture, by this action, that he chose
to mention this in his first address to
Congress.
And then during the conflict between
India and Pakistan, uh once that
conflict was over and Trump played a
role in diffusing it, Pakistan, of
course, uh you know, Pakistani leaders,
I should say, uh you know, kept saying
how grateful they were to President
Trump.
And then, of course, announcing Nobel
Peace Prize for him, which I personally
was a critic of. I wrote against it. I
tweeted against it. And I said, "Why are
we giving a Nobel Peace Prize to a man
who is not exactly been promoting peace
around the world?" But it seemed to do
the trick.
And uh Trump became even closer uh to
the Pakistani leadership, uh
particularly, of course, to Field
Marshal Asim Munir. That level of
flattery, even obsequiousness, some
would say, made many Pakistanis
uncomfortable.
Well, yes, uh absolutely because
remember, uh President Trump he'd
attacked uh Iran along with Israel
around that
uh or a little later than that time. So,
clearly there was questioning about that
decision. But I think beyond that
announcement of the Nobel Peace Prize,
there were also these sweetheart
business deals
that Pakistani leaders were offering
Trump. And in addition to that,
Pakistan's offer
to open up the country for mining for
critical minerals, which they knew was
really very high up on Trump's agenda
given the fact that the US had fallen
behind China. So, I mean, I think if you
put all of that together, that went into
the relationship that, you know, then
helped Pakistan emerge as the mediator.
And let's talk about the other side of
then the relationship between Pakistan
and Iran, which has also been complex at
times, including relatively recently in
2024 when the two countries were
striking each other towards Iran's east
and Pakistan's west and saying that
there were terrorist hideouts on each
other's soil. Yes, you're absolutely
right. The relationship with Iran has
been, you know, up and down for the last
couple of decades.
But also because of what you mentioned,
the exchange of missile strikes with
both countries accusing the other of
giving a safe haven,
albeit unintentionally,
to militants that threaten their
security. So, it really was after these
missile strikes when the two countries
decided to
mend fences that I think the new
relationship began to take shape. And
that's when we saw the two engaging very
closely,
visitors coming to Pakistan from Iran.
And then I think even more
significantly, the way Pakistan stood in
solidarity with Iran last year when
there was a joint Israeli-American
attack. Well, actually it was an Israeli
attack and then the Americans joined in
the bombing, you would recall.
At that time, Pakistan, I think amongst
all the Muslim countries, was probably
the most outspoken
in expressing its solidarity with Iran,
for which Iranian leaders were very,
very publicly grateful. And then that
was followed by a stream of Iranian
visitors to Pakistan, including a Mr.
Larijani, who was, of course, later
assassinated. He came to Pakistan,
others came to Pakistan. So, you could
see that the relationship was, you know,
being strengthened by all these visits
and interactions.
And I, you know, ultimately, I think the
search for a mediator whom both
countries could have confidence in,
there really wasn't any other country. I
mean, the Arab countries were ruled out.
Oman had had their fingers burnt. So,
Oman couldn't re-emerge, or didn't want
to. Uh and then there was only really
Pakistan and Turkey left. And I think
Pakistan, because of the personal
factor, Turkey didn't uh enjoy that
sort of closeness with the Trump
administration that Field Marshal Munir
did. There's also been a bit of
tightrope walking, hasn't there, for
Pakistan in this period, in that it
condoled over the killing of the supreme
leader, and also said to Iran that its
attacks on the Gulf were regrettable. I
do also want to ask you about Pakistan's
self-interest in this, because in this
last month, how badly has the country
been affected by the energy disruption?
What have you seen play out around you
in Islamabad? Look, this was very high
stakes for Pakistan because of the
economic pain that Pakistan had begun to
feel already, and could see that a
protracted conflict would bring even
more economic pain. So, although
Pakistan didn't get into rationing of
oil, you didn't see queues at petrol
pumps in the capital or elsewhere, but
you did see the spike in the oil price.
The government had to raise the price of
oil and of course the government
announced a series of austerity measures
because it wanted to conserve fuel.
Remember that Pakistan imports almost
90% of its oil requirements from the
Gulf countries. So again, if the
conflict had prolonged, the economic
damage at a time in Pakistan's economy
in any case is very fragile, very weak.
We're in an IMF program. I mean, it
would have blown our economy off course
if the war had continued.
And schools have been closed. It has
been too expensive for some people to
get to work. So there've been all kinds
of hardships of that kind, what it means
for people's incomes. Let's talk then
about this 10 or 15-point plan. Iran is
going into these talks with very
ambitious, some would say outlandish,
demands. And at the same time President
Trump is saying the military objectives
have been met. Right now both sides have
a narrative which says that they've
achieved their objectives, that they are
they've been victorious. Both sides are
saying that.
But I think both sides know that their
demands or conditions or terms for these
negotiations are maximalist.
So the question is, and I think it's
hard to answer that question right now,
is whether they can find sufficient
common ground.
Because you know, Mishal did did find
common ground when Oman was mediating.
As the Omani's foreign minister has said
so many times,
they were close to a deal at that time.
And then suddenly, in the midst of
negotiations, America decided to join
Israel in attacking Iran.
So that part perhaps can be sort of
in a way, you know, they can go back to
that kind of an agreement. But the
additionality is provided by the Strait
of Hormuz.
Because that now becomes central
to the negotiation. Then there, you can
see the positions are very far apart. Uh
the Americans, I mean,
President Trump keeps changing his mind
every few hours. So, if I say he said
this last time, it may change uh in the
next 2 days. I mean, I can't guarantee
that.
But, you know, he's saying he'd like to
work with Iran to regulate or operate
the Strait of Hormuz.
Uh the Iranians uh you know,
are probably aghast
at having to work with anybody, but
they're prepared to work with Oman.
But, they're saying we're going to
charge fees now. I mean, this has been a
free ride.
Uh and we're going to charge fees for
whatever maritime traffic takes place
through the strait. So, I think, you
know, again, maximalist positions. We
don't know
the kind of agreement they'll reach
because this now will become very
central to a comprehensive settlement.
We don't know how kind what kind of
agreement they'll reach or
or its chances of being anything
lasting. I mean, one thing, for example,
where we know there's a difference is on
Lebanon. Pakistan's Prime Minister
Shahbaz Sharif saying Lebanon,
the Israeli war in Lebanon is part of
this, and Israel saying very clearly
that it is not.
Well, I think the big bigger question is
whether Israel will sabotage the
agreement, the the ceasefire.
So, Lebanon is only part of it.
Uh I mean, the major
part is it concerns the ceasefire
between the United States and um
and Iran.
So, if they were to sabotage that and
play spoiler in that
uh by continuing attacks on Iran and
then sort of exposing uh Trump's
inability, if he's unable, that is, or
unwilling,
to constrain and restrain Israel, then
we're looking at a very complex uh and
challenging situation. So, I think the
key lies in Trump showing that he can
restrain Netanyahu, he can control and
contain Israel. That is the big sort of
question, I think, and we don't have an
answer to that yet. So, even though
there are many unknowns in this, what
does your gut instinct tell you about
the chances of this process in Islamabad
leading to something that averts a
return to to war or or even just bring
some stability to the global economy?
Well, I'd like to be optimistic, and my
optimism, I think, rests on firm ground
because both sides know that there is
more economic pain for everyone,
including themselves, if there was a
relapse into fighting. Both sides are in
a position right now to sort of proclaim
that we've achieved our objectives. They
may not be able to do that if there is,
again, a recurrence of war.
So, you know, that provides a strong
incentive to both sides
to try to hammer out a deal.
So, you know, I I I hope my optimism
is pays off in the sense that, you know,
I hope they're able to arrive at a
settlement because they can't keep going
to war every 7 months. I mean, they can,
but I think the costs are piling up,
have been piling up. But also, Iran has
really discovered its power, hasn't it?
Perhaps it always knew that its power
was there and it's it's everyone else
who's discovered it. But that dimension,
the Strait of Hormuz, this unique place
part of the world, appears to have been
a dimension that the Americans did not
foresee, did not think through at all.
Yes, absolutely. I think the Americans
made several miscalculations, and this
was one of them. The other big
miscalculation, as you know, was the
thought that the Iranians would simply,
you know, once their leaders had been
decapitated or assassinated, that the
Iranian regime would just collapse.
Didn't happen. So, I mean, there were a
series of miscalculations, including the
fact that the Iranians would get so much
leverage by controlling the Strait
of Hormuz. So, you know,
but ultimately and fundamentally, and
I've written about this,
the US historically underestimates the
power of nationalism.
It's done that throughout history.
Did that in Vietnam, did that in
Afghanistan, did that in Iraq, and now
did this in Iran. They really thought
that by attacking Iran, the people of
Iran, the dissidents, those who oppose
the regime, will rise.
You know,
war has the opposite effect. People
close ranks. They forget the internal
differences, they come together because
the strong force of nationalism is what
motivates them
to become a more unified nation, and
that's exactly what happened. I mean,
even in Afghanistan, I mean, Taliban
weren't exactly the most popular people
in that country. And yet, 20 years, they
managed to, well, if not defeat the
United States, but prevent them from
winning at the war. Is that what you
hope that the United States learns this
time? Because you've worked with
successive American administrations. You
were in the United States as Pakistan's
ambassador when 9/11 took place, which
meant that you were there when the
Afghanistan engagement began, and that
drew Pakistan into the US military and
political orbit for many years. And you
would also have seen the start of what
became the build-up to war in Iraq. Yes,
you're right. I was there in Washington,
and I remember the early days after
9/11. Of course, it was a tremendously
horrific tragedy that befell America, no
question about that. But what uh my
country's officials privately told the
Americans at that time in those early
days
was that don't go and occupy
Afghanistan.
We understand you want to take some kind
of military action, but it should be, in
the words of the then president, short
and surgical.
So, he even said at that time, "Don't
become an army of occupation."
Why? Because, you know, we have
experience in this region and we know
that people would resist an outsider.
They will resist foreign occupation. And
that's exactly what happened. Now,
whether the US learns this lesson,
and it's such a paradox, because here is
a country where I've spent many years as
a diplomat, uh which really sort of
takes pride in its own country, where
people are sort of flag-waving,
patriotic, sort of, you know, much is
much store is put on all of that.
And yet they don't understand that other
countries have people who are equally
proud of their country and and you know,
believe that, you [clears throat] know,
and are nationalists. They want to
protect their country.
I do want to ask you to look a bit
further and whether you think this
moment will mark the start of
a different world order where America
has learned that it can start wars, but
they can spin out of control and it
can't control the economic fallout and
where other regional dynamics and
alliances shift as a result.
Well, I hope that the lesson learned
would be that military supremacy doesn't
achieve the outcome
that is desired.
I think the world in any case is moving
towards a more multipolar
world, if I can put it that way. Uh and
that US dominance
is fading.
Has been fading. I mean, the the
combined military might of the United
States and Israel
took on a country that was, you know,
militarily much, much weaker.
Whose allies in the region had also been
weakened.
And yet that country resisted. Now, what
does that say?
What that says is that America's
dominance and the era of Americans
dominance in the region is basically
over. It also shows I mean in in in the
case of my country uh and the role
Pakistan played, it shows the advent
and the importance of middle powers
that are now able to shape geopolitics.
So, Pakistan by playing this role of
mediation
has established itself
as a middle power which has the capacity
to influence if not shape
international
politics. Is a loser in that though,
perhaps democracy in Pakistan in that
the key player that we see in all of
this is an unelected army officer?
Welcome to Pakistan.
That's where we've been for a lot of our
history.
And uh yes, I mean we have in place a
hybrid government
which means that power is shared between
civilians and the military. And in this
particular case it was the military that
was you know, conducting
much of the diplomacy. I mean, you can't
say that the prime minister wasn't
involved. Of course, he was. So, the
civilians were also of course involved,
but the driving force
was the field marshal
and the military. That's the nature of
politics and government in Pakistan.
When you say you believe the era of
American dominance is over, just explain
how you see that playing out in the
Middle East because President Trump is
saying he thinks that this could be the
golden age of the Middle East and
America has all these bases in the
region. What happens do you think in the
long run or maybe even the medium term
to those bases in the Gulf? Look, I mean
when I say that the era of American
dominance is over, I think there will be
rethinking in the US
about you know, what is the point of
having thousands and thousands of US
troops based in the region when they
can't
on their own determine what happens in
the region. They can't shape the Middle
East the way they wanted to even before.
I mean Iraq is something that you
mentioned before. I mean what did they
do there? So I mean it's been a process.
It's not as if this war has brought it
about.
A process was already underway.
That US dominance over the world
actually, not just the region
was beginning to be replaced by the fact
that power was being dispersed amongst
many
in different places.
Not just one country being able to, you
know, get the outcomes that it wanted.
It It could only get the outcomes that
it wanted in cooperation with other
countries. Something that President
Trump claimed he doesn't believe in.
So he decided to act unilaterally. I
mean of course he had a co-partner in
Israel. He never consulted his allies.
So I think, you know, we are looking at
a very different world not just because
of the war, but because the war has
reinforced certain trends that were
already in play. But if there is one
winner in all of this, would you say it
was China? And to what extent do you
believe it has been involved in bringing
this summit about? Well, I think I mean
there are reports that the Chinese
eventually persuaded
Iran.
And they also played a role vis-a-vis
communication with the United States. I
have no idea about the veracity of these
reports. But certainly when you say
China is a beneficiary yes, I think one
could say that because what this entire
episode has shown and highlighted
is that America has an unstable leader
who conducts
unilateral
sort of policies and acts unilaterally.
But China on the other hand is a is a
force for stability in the world. And
that's how they project themselves also.
But it also happens to be be
I mean more countries have trading
agreements now with China. China is a
bigger trading partner of most countries
in the world. I mean, I say that
absolutely it's absolutely accurate. The
EU's largest trading partner is China.
Many Asian countries largest trading
partner is China. India's largest
trading partner is not the United
States, it's China. So, what does that
say?
It's what it says is that China is a
force for peace, cooperation, and
stability. Whereas the US is being run
by a man
who conducts himself in such a whimsical
manner
and who has disrupted so much in the
world, global trade, and of course has,
you know, been engaged in this in this
war of choice.
So, the contrast is stunning.
Paint a picture then of the Gulf and
South Asia, say in 3 years time. I'm
going to pick that time frame. Do you
think it is going to be a more settled
place, or do you think what has been
unleashed this kind of instability is
too immense for the situation to go back
in the box it was in at the start of the
year?
Well, certainly the Middle East has
changed forever. It will not be status
quo ante
at all.
Things are not going to go back to what
they were before. That's for sure.
Now, what comes in its place, it depends
on, I think, realignments that will take
place,
reassessments that many Gulf countries
may have to carry out. I mean, what
happened to them? Many of them are
feeling abandoned by the United States.
Many feel that this American security
umbrella, when the push came to shove,
it was of no value to them because
America didn't defend them. America
defended Israel.
And Israel always has the priority over
them.
So, you know, a lot of
the dynamics in the years to come will
be shaped by these kinds of assessments
and calculations. But, certainly we're
not going to be in for a period of
immediate stability. I think that one
can conclude.
But it will be a period where the US
will increasingly withdraw.
Which is what Trump had said in the
first place in his national security
strategy. And then who fills that power
vacuum?
Will depend on the realignments that
will take shape here.
You talked about this being a a moment
for the middle powers. From the Indian
perspective, the strategy has never been
for Pakistan to be in that
category of middle powers.
Whereas actually in the last few weeks
we have seen Saudi Arabia working on
this. We've seen Turkey working on this.
And Pakistan's Prime Minister has
thanked Qatar and and Egypt as well.
Where do you think this leaves India?
I think right now on the wrong side of
history.
They're just lined up with the wrong
countries. They broke from their
traditional position of support for the
Palestinians. As I said they, you know,
lined up with Israel and supported
Israel.
Whereas they had a good relationship
with Iran. They had cooperation on trade
with Iran. All of that went for a six
when the Indians decided or rather Prime
Minister Modi's government who came
under a lot of domestic political fire
from the opposition who said why are you
reversing
India's well-known well-established
foreign policy which is what he did. He
actually did a Trump on India.
Completely reversed and upended
many of India's traditional alignments.
So I mean they've been sidelined by all
this.
Now whether that leads to a reassessment
by India, I don't know.
But I think for Pakistan it is very
important because in a way it helps
Pakistan to
extricate itself if I could put it that
way. Not that it physically can
extricate itself but at least
diplomatically extricate itself from
South Asia and become a player on a much
bigger canvas, which is the Middle East.
I mean, not that it's new. It has played
this role before, but it had in recent
years become rather more focused on
India and its eastern border rather than
the western
rather than on the western frontier. But
in the complexities of Pakistan in the
Middle East, the Prime Minister of
Pakistan being on the board of peace,
an organization, if one can call it
that, it's perfectly clear President
Trump would like to be an alternative to
the UN. How does that square with having
principles on peace and stability and
and and supporting long-established
international organizations? I was a
critic of Pakistan joining the board of
peace, so you know, when you ask me that
question, you are sort of
asking somebody who's already there
saying my country shouldn't have
lined up on that because it was so
unclear what President Trump really
wanted.
He wanted to legitimize his Middle East
plan for Gaza.
And I didn't think that Pakistan should
be a party to that, but it seems that
President Trump got bored of the board
of peace. And I mean, it's it's it's
tragic that the Palestinians
and their issue has been again, you
know, overshadowed,
sidelined by this war that was imposed
on Iran. Just before we let you go, a
final question related to your long
experience as a diplomat. If you could
give advice to the people who are
presumably going to be face-to-face with
each other in a very high-stakes
encounter, what would you say? Well, I
would say what we used to say a lot at
the UN, which is you have to think of
the other's concern
as much as you push your own interests.
And therefore, the need to show
flexibility
so that common ground can be found.
Otherwise, we can't have an agreement.
Melih Allodi, thank you very much.
It's a pleasure.
>> [music]